>> Jason Pamental: As we start to
think about using view port units and
tying that into the way we scale things,
it really starts to
give me some ideas on how we might
get away from defining these fixed
relationships across all of
these different break points.
And this article from Tim Brown,
it was really interesting,
I really wasn't quite sure what to make
of it because it's pretty complicated.
And it's pretty complicated in a way
that meant you still had to rewrite
things often.
And so adding complexity and
adding frequency didn't seem
like such a great idea.
But once I started figuring out how
to add these things together and
started looking at what Lea Verou was
talking about with CSS variables,
that got me thinking about how could I tie
these things together with variable fonts
and have all of these things flex and
move and scale together.
And that's where it started to really
turn into something that I thought was
important and novel and a new way of
thinking about typographic hierarchy
in a way that's pretty sophisticated but
also pretty portable.
So it might be intimidating to write once,
but
once you have it then you can use it and
modify and tweak it very easily.
So if you haven't used custom
properties before in CSS,
they're relatively easy to declare.
You can either define this way so
it will be available to
anything in the document or
you can scope it inside the selector.
So in this case I'm saying,
root, meaning I want this available
throughout the entire document.
And I've set some variables
equivalent to my main break points.
And then I have a minimum and
a maximum size.
So I don't know if you recall when I first
talked about view port units earlier.
The problem is,
in using view port units to size text,
if the window gets even narrower,
like maybe an Apple Watch anyone?
If you're sizing view port units there,
you'd have very unpredictable results on
how tiny the text actually gets to be or
how big it is on a really big desktop.
This locks idea that Tim Brown wrote
about, is a way to set a low-end and
high-end and then have everything
else calculate in the middle.
So it looks really normal here
where I've taken that number value.
I said five and ten, I didn't give it
a unit I need to not give you the unit at
that point, where here the calculation
is simply adding the value.
That's really all this is doing.
So, we've got var(--h1-font-size-min), and
the calculation is multiply that time 1em,
so it ends with an value, that's
the only purpose to that calculation.
Now, on the high end once I've
reached the pretty large desktop
I'm using the font size max so 10m.
So five and ten,
low-end to the high-end so
on a phone it's gonna be five, on a pretty
large desktop, it's gonna be ten.
And what we wanna do is figure out
what do we do everywhere in between.
And that's where this comes in,
queue headaches.
So what this is doing is add a minimum
width of 24.15em which is more or
less making sure that as soon
as you turn your phone sideways,
we've tripped this breakpoint.
So it's just bigger than any of
the phones that I could find
in terms of the reported resolution and
sizing.
So that I knew that something would happen
as soon as you start to rotate the phone.
That's when the calculation kicks in.
And what this is doing is,
starting with the minimum value and
then it's adding a subtraction
of the minimum and max.
And then it has this formula with
the low and high-end break points and
a hundred view port with units.
The nice thing about this is you're
not really gonna have to care.
Just know that it works.
So the way this is set up is
it's going anywhere between
whichever break points I've
referenced above and below.
It's going to smoothly calculate from
the low-end value to the high-end value.
And that's what you'll end up
with is some value that is,
as the screen size gets bigger that
value is gonna grow from five to ten.
It will never get any smaller than five,
and never get any bigger than ten.
So that's what's gonna be important about
using this for font size, for line height.
We can use it for optical sizing.
We can use it for There's a couple
of other values we can use it for.
There is a limitation.
The problem with this calculation is
it always ends up with a unit value.
Because once you've introduce those units,
view port, width and ems,
you can't get rid of them in CSS calc.
They're working on that.
There's actually active discussion
in the CSS working group
which I found out by going to GitHub and
commenting on some of these issues so
I see the updates pretty regularly.
As soon as we have that we can
use this kind of calculation for
any variable value that we want.
So font width, as an example.
If we want the characters slightly
narrower on small screen and
slightly wider on a big one to sort of
tailor the reading experience a little
bit, having that on a smooth
sliding scale is pretty nice.
We do have some other things that will
make it a little bit easier using CSS
variables, we'll come back to
that in just a little bit.
So here's what it looks like in action.
As this animates we've
done a number of things.
We've changed the optical sizing, the line
height and the ascenders and descenders.
And we've also, down below,
changed the font size.
We went from at a high end of about
18 pixel equivalent down to 16.
Or that 100% value, but we've made
the characters slightly narrower so
we have a few more characters per line.
It makes it a little bit easier to read,
and we've played around with
the optical-sizing to make sure that
the characters stay sturdy enough at that
small size, and we've also brought the
line-height a little bit closer together.
The purpose of line height is to allow you
a comfortable experience reading across
the line without making it too big a gap
to get back to the next line easily,
to let your eye travel that way.
The shorter the line, the less line
height you need, and that also makes for
the convenient truth of having more
content on the screen at any given time.
So it might not be as big
an exaggeration as I'm doing here,
just to kind of show you things changing,
but it's certainly good to tighten
it up just a little bit so that you get
a little bit more content on-screen.